First MVC: Controller and View tutorials: MT sweep all issues fixed (#21379)
dotnet/AspNetCore.Docs: aspnetcore/tutorials/first-mvc-app/adding-controller.md

::: moniker range=">= aspnetcore-3.0"

> The Model-View-Controller (MVC) architectural pattern separates an app into three main components: **M**odel, **V**iew, and **C**ontroller. The MVC pattern helps you create apps that are:

Reviewer: Prefer the original to a two bullet list. It's not that long.

* More testable.
* Easier to update than traditional monolithic apps.

MVC-based apps contain:

* **M**odels: Classes that represent the data of the app. The model classes use validation logic to enforce business rules for that data. Typically, model objects retrieve and store model state in a database. In this tutorial, a `Movie` model retrieves movie data from a database, provides it to the view or updates it. Updated data is written to a database.
* **V**iews: Views are the components that display the app's user interface (UI). Generally, this UI displays the model data.
* **C**ontrollers: Classes that:
  * Handle browser requests.
  * Retrieve model data.
  * Call view templates that return a response.

In an MVC app, the view only displays information. The controller handles and responds to user input and interaction. For example, the controller handles route data and query-string values, and passes these values to the model. The model might use these values to query the database. For example:

> * `Https://localhost:5001/Home/Privacy`: has route data of `Home`, the controller.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `Https://localhost:5001/Home/Privacy`:  specifies the `Home`  controller  and the `Privacy` action.
```

Replace the contents of *Controllers/HelloWorldController.cs* with the following:

  [!code-csharp[](~/tutorials/first-mvc-app/start-mvc/sample/MvcMovie/Controllers/HelloWorldController.cs?name=snippet_1)]

Every `public` method in a controller is callable as an HTTP endpoint. In the sample above, both methods return a string. Note the comments preceding each method.

An HTTP endpoint:

* Is a targetable URL in the web application, such as `https://localhost:5001/HelloWorld`.
* Combines:

  * The protocol used: `HTTPS`.

>   * The network location of the web server (including the TCP port): `localhost:5001`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * The network location of the web server, including the TCP port: `localhost:5001`.
```

  * The target URI: `HelloWorld`.

> The first comment states this is an [HTTP GET](https://www.w3schools.com/tags/ref_httpmethods.asp) method that's invoked by appending `/HelloWorld/` to the base URL.

Reviewer: Use Monzilla, not w3schools
https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/HTTP/Methods/GET

Run the app without the debugger.

Append "HelloWorld" to the path in the address bar. The `Index` method returns a string.

![Browser window showing an app response of This is my default action](~/tutorials/first-mvc-app/adding-controller/_static/hell1.png)

MVC invokes controller classes, and the action methods within them, depending on the incoming URL. The default [URL routing logic](xref:mvc/controllers/routing) used by MVC, uses a format like this to determine what code to invoke:

`/[Controller]/[ActionName]/[Parameters]`

The routing format is set in the `Configure` method in *Startup.cs* file.

[!code-csharp[](~/tutorials/first-mvc-app/start-mvc/sample/MvcMovie3/Startup.cs?name=snippet_1&highlight=5)]

When you browse to the app and don't supply any URL segments, it defaults to the "Home" controller and the "Index" method specified in the template line highlighted above.  In the preceding URL segments:

> * The first URL segment determines the controller class to run. So `localhost:{PORT}/HelloWorld` maps to the **HelloWorld**Controller class.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The first URL segment determines the controller class to run. So `localhost:5001/HelloWorld` maps to the **HelloWorld**Controller class.
```

> * The second part of the URL segment determines the action method on the class. So `localhost:{PORT}/HelloWorld/Index` would cause the `Index` method of the `HelloWorldController` class to run. Notice that you only had to browse to `localhost:{PORT}/HelloWorld` and the `Index` method was called by default. `Index` is the default method that will be called on a controller if a method name isn't explicitly specified.

Reviewer: use 5001

> * The second part of the URL segment determines the action method on the class. So `localhost:{PORT}/HelloWorld/Index` would cause the `Index` method of the `HelloWorldController` class to run. Notice that you only had to browse to `localhost:{PORT}/HelloWorld` and the `Index` method was called by default. `Index` is the default method that will be called on a controller if a method name isn't explicitly specified.

Reviewer: > would cause 
remove FT
causes

![Browser window showing an application response of This is the Welcome action method](~/tutorials/first-mvc-app/adding-controller/_static/welcome.png)

Modify the code to pass some parameter information from the URL to the controller. For example, `/HelloWorld/Welcome?name=Rick&numtimes=4`.

Change the `Welcome` method to include two parameters as shown in the following code.

[!code-csharp[](~/tutorials/first-mvc-app/start-mvc/sample/MvcMovie/Controllers/HelloWorldController.cs?name=snippet_2)]

The preceding code:

* Uses the C# optional-parameter feature to indicate that the `numTimes` parameter defaults to 1 if no value is passed for that parameter.
* Uses `HtmlEncoder.Default.Encode` to protect the app from malicious input, such as through JavaScript.
* Uses [Interpolated Strings](/dotnet/articles/csharp/language-reference/keywords/interpolated-strings) in `$"Hello {name}, NumTimes is: {numTimes}"`.

Run the app and browse to:

  `https://localhost:{PORT}/HelloWorld/Welcome?name=Rick&numtimes=4`

Replace `{PORT}` with your port number.

> Try different values for `name` and `numtimes` in the URL. The MVC [model binding](xref:mvc/models/model-binding) system automatically maps the named parameters from the query string in the address bar, to parameters in the method. See [Model Binding](xref:mvc/models/model-binding) for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Try different values for `name` and `numtimes` in the URL. The MVC [model binding](xref:mvc/models/model-binding) system automatically maps the named parameters from the query string to parameters in the method. See [Model Binding](xref:mvc/models/model-binding) for more information.
```

![Browser window showing an application response of Hello Rick, NumTimes is\: 4](~/tutorials/first-mvc-app/adding-controller/_static/rick4.png)

In the previous image:

> * The URL segment (`Parameters`) isn't used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The URL segment `Parameters` isn't used.
```
